As the people we interact with become more diverse, code switching becomes more common in 
everyday conversation. Elena Williams explores the reasons why people code switch by drawing on 
her experiences and those of other code switchers. Growing up in a bilingual family, code switching 
was a fact of life. With a special Spanish speaking mother and an English-speaking father, it was 
common for us to switch from one language to another in a conversation, sometimes doing so within 
the same sentence. It's not just about switching a language though. Code switching also covers 
changes in dialect and style. I'm constantly confused by the way my mother picks up the phone and 
puts on the most sophisticated accent that she can manage.  
  
Code switching is something we all do, whether it's intentional or subconscious. According to 
researchers, there are several reasons for this. In my case, there are times when English lacks the 
words I need to describe a particular concept, so I switch to Spanish, or vice versa. Emotions play a 
prominent role, too. When I get angry, I tend to shut in English, probably because I grew up by 
watching my angry father did the same, while fear and excitement usually reveal themselves in 
Spanish.  
  
Another reason for code switching is adaptation. When Ellis moved to the US from Wales aged 12, 
he was desperate not to be staring in class. “With my Welsh accent I could be visible and be easily 
realized, so I quickly started to mimic the local accent. I have a good ear, which means within a few 
weeks I sounded as American as my classmates. My parents and siblings didn't, so weirdly, when I 
am at home with them, I speak in my Welsh accent. If we have American visitors, I will flip between 
the two. It gets a few puzzled and silly looks at first, but they soon get used to it.”  
  
Whether we are children or adults, we often make an effort to adapt, which is why we may call switch 
with different social groups.  Lara recalls her teenage years in the UK. “Making up our own language 
was a natural way for us to show how we adapt, to differentiate ourselves from adults and to increase 
our autonomy. We would learn to use words like ‘rents’ for parents or ‘on fleek’ to mean stylish.  
These phrases come in and out of fashion pretty quickly though, so I would sound like ancient if I 
tried to use them now!”  
  
Another reason for code switching is social class. David has experience of this. “I grew up in a socially 
deprived area where the local dialect is one that people might look down on. When I went to 
university, I soon you realized I needed to adopt one that would better help me to get on in life.  
Code switching gave me a kind of social power that perhaps I hadn't had before.”  
  
One final reason for code switching is the desire to be persuasive. When Anabel started in sales, she 
discovered that people were more easy-going if she spoke in a southern US accent rather than her 
normal east coast one. “There's a growing perception that a southern accent is friendlier. People 
seem to warm towards me a lot faster if I put on a southern slow speaking and more significantly, it 
led to more sales, but I felt like a fraud at times, but I didn't think I was doing any harm.”